[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The relationship between
humans and crystals is ancient.
Think of piezoelectric
megalithic structures,
the revered healing
powers of jade
in traditional Chinese medicine
dating back thousands of years,
crystal-filled shrines
and ceremonies in almost
every religion, and royalty,
who have worn gemstones
as symbols of power since
the beginning of time.
Today, we wouldn't have
computers, traffic lights,
ultrasound, sonar, aircraft,
quartz watches, cars,
or LCD screens if it wasn't
for crystal technology.
It's like we've entered
a new Stone Age.
Crystals are more
popular than ever.
You only have to look
at your Instagram feed
to witness their
booming comeback,
from crystal grid giftsets
and infrared amethyst mats,
to crystal-infused
makeup and skincare,
to the revival of
ancient Chinese empress
practices, such as crystal
gua sha face rollers.
Homes are filled with them.
Bodies are adorned with them.
So what is it about crystals?
Why are people
obsessed with them?
Why have they been used for
health, healing, beauty,
and power since the
beginning of time?
What is behind today's
roaring crystal renaissance?
Watch as we explore
different perspectives,
such as scientific--
>> Talked about the crystal
classes and the crystal
systems.
>> Vedic--
>> We work through this.
>> Daoist--
>> --to help calm
down the chest.
>> Hermetic, Native American,
and New Age to unearth
the mystery of the
ancient mineral kingdom.
Join us on a crystalline
journey to remember
the origins of a healing
power that for many had long
been forgotten, so we can
empower the revival of one
of humanity's greatest allies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The idea of crystals in
our lives is something that is
becoming very, very
much in vogue right now.
We see crystals everywhere.
>> People have loved crystals
for as long as humans have been
around.
>> Crystals are the flowers
of the mineral kingdom.
They have consciousness,
and they hold information.
>> Crystals are the touchstones
for connecting humans
to the mystery of life.
>> We have had a long
relationship with crystals,
everywhere from using them for
jewelry and aesthetic purposes
of beauty.
They're beautiful.
They're sparkly.
They make beautiful adornments.
>> --to using them to create
dyes and technologies.
We've used them for trade.
>> They've been used for power
and protection and success
throughout all sorts of
cultures all over the world.
Because there really is
something deeper to it
that human nature is
intrinsically aware of
and attracted to.
>> From a scientific
perspective,
a crystal is a physical
substance that is highly
ordered on the atomic level.
>> Crystals are a
lattice structure.
Crystals have taken molecules or
atoms or ions arranged together
in a very energy-efficient way.
>> And scientists believe that
this order and this structure
actually reflects the geometry
of energy that we cannot see
on the quantum level.
>> They're just this perfect
embodiment of sacred geometry
in the physical.
>> It's the crystal matrix, the
organization of the molecular
structure in specific
geometrical forms,
that determines that all
energies that go through
the crystal will either be
transformed or amplified.
>> So when we look at a crystal,
we're looking at a physical
expression in our world
of a higher form of energy
expressing from perhaps
many other different worlds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals have been around
for billions of years.
They're as old as planets,
and even as old as some stars.
A lot of the material that
goes into the crystals
actually had their
birth in the stars.
[EXPLOSION]
>> We really cannot separate
the idea of a crystal from
our everyday lives, from our
planet, or even our bodies.
Because the very foundation
of carbon-based life itself--
carbon is a
crystalline material.
We are carbon-based beings.
>> The minerals that make
crystals up are also part
of our own body.
And even our own DNA is a
form of a liquid crystal.
So we are intimately
connected with crystals.
>> The human body is made
of about 140 elements,
some of them in very,
very small numbers--
primarily, hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, carbon.
This is what our DNA is made of.
These are all elements
on the periodic table.
We're made of the stuff
on the periodic table that
are crystalline in nature.
>> We are made from the same
elements as the stones we most
commonly use in medicine.
All quartz crystals are
made of silicon and oxygen,
as are the agates,
jaspers, and chalcedonies.
The stones support the
very stuff we're made of.
>> So the atoms of our bodies
are following crystalline
templates.
The DNA of our
biology is following
a crystalline template.
And now as those atoms
coalesce, following
those genetic
instructions, we begin
to create bone, which is
crystalline in nature;
blood, which is
the organs of the bodies that
follow crystalline patterns;
the water in our bodies.
In a very real sense, we live
in a crystalline universe.
We live upon a
crystalline planet.
And we are
crystalline-based beings.
And that concept opens the door
to vast, new possibilities that
are only available if we
shift the way we think,
so that we can optimize
our potential and our lives
and in our world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The relationship between
humans and crystals are
manifold.
>> They've become very
much like friends.
>> Many of us have an
instinctive feeling,
almost a sense of trust,
that there is deep,
profound value in the
use of gems and crystals
for the ascension and the
evolution of humanity.
>> Crystals support us to
blend the worlds of spirit
and matter.
They are like a bridge.
They empower us to
embody the light within
and to express the
crystalline essence.
>> Crystals have been
popular for ages.
But we're entering this
new period of rediscovery
that can allow us to use
this ancient knowledge here
in the information age.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As a scientist, I am not
surprised to see the foundation
of the most highly advanced,
most sophisticated technology
that we have today is, in
fact, based on crystals
and crystalline structures.
>> We are living in a
technological crystal age.
All of our electronics, lasers,
computers, sound systems--
all of these function with small
bits of crystal at their core.
This is because
crystals transform
and/or amplify energy.
There's a simple explanation
that we can give to you.
If I take this crystal and
I hit it with a hammer,
we'll see a spark coming out.
It took mechanical energy, and
it produced electrical energy.
That's how the microphone
that's recording my voice works.
There's this tiny
quartz crystal in there.
And with the impulse of my
voice, it goes into the machine
and it's amplified.
Contrary is true.
If you put an electrical
current into my crystal,
it will start vibrating
at a very precise timing.
And that's how your
quartz watch works.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Crystals are used
really extensively
in our technology of today.
Everything from LCD
and LEDs use crystals.
>> They're using
ultrasound, lasers.
>> The communication--
technology that we use today is
based upon 17 elements that
are called rare Earth elements.
And they are called
rare Earth elements
because they are found in very
few locations on the Earth,
primarily deposits
in China, Russia,
a little bit in Australia, and
a little bit in North America.
These are the foundations
of solar panels.
They're the foundations
of battery technology.
of windmills
and electric automobiles.
And this is one of the places
of concern for where technology
is going because so
much of the technology
is relying upon
crystalline elements that
are relatively rare and in
short supply on our planet.
>> Crystals have become so much
a part of our technology that--
I recall back in
2003, that there
was a statistic that showed
that over two billion crystals
per year were being
generated or manufactured
in laboratories in order to
be used for our technology.
>> Most of the crystals used
in modern technology are now
lab-created.
Of course, natural
quartz crystals
were used in the beginning of
radio and computer technology.
But they have long been replaced
with synthetic crystals, which
being free from flaws
make them more efficient.
>> Lab-grown crystals are a
newer phenomenon, obviously.
But I think there's
two ways to see it.
On one hand, by doing the
crystals in a laboratory,
we're not mining those
crystals out of the Earth.
So it is more eco-friendly
in that sense.
Secondly, the crystals in a
laboratory are more controlled.
So their growth conditions
are more controlled,
which allows for them to have
more perfected structures.
So, for example, our
silicon-based chips
that go into all of our
technology of our computers
and so forth, those are a
very regular perfected array,
like almost depositing
one atom at a time
to create such a
perfect crystal.
So from a technological
perspective,
I think a lab-grown
crystal is great.
>> Synthetic rubies are used
to concentrate indirect light
and laser technology.
Nongem-quality beryls, including
emerald and aquamarine,
can be a source for the element
beryllium, which can withstand
extremely hot temperatures.
[ROARING]
Among many other
uses, it is used
to make heat shields to
protect astronauts as they pass
through the Earth's atmosphere.
>> When it comes to working with
crystals for healing purposes,
I recommend that we work
more with natural crystals.
Because there's a different kind
of spirit, a different essence.
And the essence of
mother Gaia itself
is within those
natural crystals when
it comes to working with
them at a personal level
for the energetic subtle
energy parts of what
we talk about with
healing work and crystals.
>> When we understand how
stones and minerals are used
in industry, we can get more
insight into their properties
for us in healing.
In the case of
ruby, its function
is to invigorate energy
and aid blood circulation.
It helps us be more
decisive, and to focus
and direct the mind.
In the case of beryls,
one of their qualities
in stone medicine is to convey
strength and resilience to us.
We can see that same quality
in beryllium's use in industry.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals these days
are making such a comeback
into even our skincare products
and our beauty products,
our makeup and so forth.
>> It's not new that stones
are being incorporated
into cosmetics.
Pearl powder has been
used cosmetically
in China for centuries.
>> Pearl is made of
a lot of calcium.
Pearl has often been an
ancient secret for beauty,
especially in Asia, and both
for internal beauty as well
as external beauty.
>> Ancient Egyptians used
crushed malachite for eye
shadow and crushed antimony for
their thick, black eyeliner.
>> Part of this is
because of their color,
and sometimes their iridescence
where they bring that shine
to things.
So when a woman, for example,
wears gems and they shine,
it brings a certain radiance.
And it's the same idea
when we're putting it
in our makeup-- and we have
these mineral-based makeups--
and they have that sort
of luminescence and shine
and radiance.
So it does bring
a lightness to it.
>> In recent years, modern
cosmetics have made a shift
from using plastic microbeads
to minerals because the plastic
was polluting our water.
Aside from protecting
the environment,
one of the benefits
of using stones
in skincare and
other beauty products
is that they are basically
us, chemically speaking.
>> Crystals consist of the
same pure minerals and trace
elements which support
the essential functions
of our bodies.
They are the ideal raw materials
for supplementing or replacing
any minerals that
may be depleted.
>> Silica supports the
integrity of the skin.
Some stones with high water
content, such as alabaster,
support hydration of the skin
and its underlying tissues.
A finely ground
powder of calcite
can be used as an exfoliant,
and at the same time,
clear inflammation that
causes the skin to be red.
>> There's rejuvenative
properties that come with these
crystals.
And it depends on the
crystal specifically,
but they come for
the rejuvenation,
their illumination.
They bring certain calming
benefits to the wearer.
So crystals are beauty.
So why not bring them
into our beauty products?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals are
making a comeback
because there's an underlying
hunger and desire for humans
to interface with a higher
dimension of truth and love,
to connect with the wisdom and
intelligent inherent in nature.
>> We live in increasingly
isolated and artificial worlds.
And I believe that
this is causing people
to crave a connection,
or even a reconnection,
to metaphysical and
mystical resources.
>> People now, today, are very
much waking up in a higher way
of consciousness.
They're becoming more
aware of the fact
that we can expand
our consciousness,
that vibration influences
us in so many ways.
And crystals are a
very accessible way,
a very tangible way
that we can start
to explore into these sort of
alternative and natural ways
of raising our vibration and
expanding our consciousness.
>> People today need
to come back to nature,
and crystals are an easy way to
have a natural being who needs
very little maintenance
to be a part of our lives.
That's why they're
so popular today.
If you know how to
work with crystals,
they can be of great help in
all aspects of your daily life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Intention is really important
when we're working with
crystals because we send
energy through our thoughts,
through our emotions, and
through our intentions.
And crystals will take that
energy in and respond to it.
They're also conscious.
They're sentient in a way.
So they can take in
the energy and respond
to the energy that
is given to them,
and then they'll put
an energy back out.
And so they're going to
work with us according
to our energy, according
to our intentions,
and according to some
of the way in which
we're having a conversation
with them, both energetically,
as well as through our
thoughts and our words.
>> What you need to know is
that the crystal will amplify
and transform all
types of energy--
electromagnetic energy,
emotional energy,
mental energy, and
healing energy.
If crystals aren't
being utilized
in ways that are
conducive and beneficial,
it can be detrimental.
So it's very important to know
that crystals don't choose
what they amplify or transform.
The crystal matrix does
not have free will.
Only humankind has free will.
Thus, only appropriate
use of the crystal
will determine its usefulness.
We have to be careful
how we use them,
as crystals don't discriminate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think intention is
critically important when
working with gems and crystals
to ensure that the results that
we have uplift ourselves
and those around us.
It's on behalf of
the greater good.
The use of crystals
to uplift humanity
has been going on for
thousands of years.
I'm a Vedic
gemologist, which means
that I work with
gems and crystals
to channel very specific
light and cosmic rays
into the wearer.
I have people calling me from
all over the world looking
to make their lives better
and the lives better
of those around them.
And when our intentions
are in alignment
with the best possible outcome
for everybody involved,
not only do the gems
work a lot better,
it's a lot more fun
for me to do it.
>> Intention is very important
when working with crystals,
perhaps not so much in guiding
the crystals to do their work,
but in being very clear about
what we want to accomplish with
them.
For example, someone is
dealing with a lot of anxiety.
There are many stones that
can be used to treat anxiety.
So how do I differentiate?
Why would I choose amethyst
over chrysocolla, for example?
Specifically, I need to
know, does this person
have anxiety because they're
overworked and stressed?
I would use amethyst
in that case.
Or does this person have
anxiety because they
have a fundamental
fear of the world?
In that case, I would
use chrysocolla.
Understanding the root
cause of the anxiety
helps to clarify our intention
and to choose a stone that will
best support that intention.
And, of course, when
we're working as healers,
our underlying
intention is always
to try to help our client
in the best way possible.
>> I often tell people that
I'm in the karma business.
What we do is going
out in the world,
and coming back around, and
making a significant impact.
So if somebody is going to use
a gemstone for something that
is out of alignment
with the greater good
or with an ill intention,
that really can backfire.
It can come back
around and cause
types of karma and
repercussions that
are even worse than the original
intention could have predicted.
>> The best advice that I have
for people who want to work
with crystals is to treat
those crystals like friends,
even treat them like people.
Talk to them.
Connect with them.
Hold them.
Care for them.
And work with them intuitively.
They are unique.
So we want to get to know each
one just like you're trying
to get to know a unique person.
Who is this person?
So this is the best way
to work with crystals.
And you may be drawn to
a particular crystal,
and you don't know why.
But as you connect
with that crystal
and develop a relationship
with that crystal,
you will learn why in time.
>> Our lives are being
improved, and we're beginning
to understand a deeper
relationship to ourselves
and to the cosmos through the
use of crystals and crystalline
technology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Who would have thought that
modern-day society is literally
powered by crystals?
They run our lives
more than most of us
could have ever imagined.
As they make their
comeback into our hands
and collective
consciousness again,
imagine where we
can go from here.
Let's journey on in this
series and learn more
about how we can make
crystals our allies, not
just in technology and
beauty, but also in healing,
manifestation, and our
spiritual evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]